workshop/Lesson-03-Dashboard-AppHost/README.md, before:

# Dashboard & Orchestration with .NET Aspire App Host

.NET Aspire provides APIs for modeling resources and dependencies within your distributed application. In addition to these APIs, there's tooling that enables some compelling scenarios. The orchestrator is intended for local development purposes.

Before continuing, consider some common terminology used in .NET Aspire:

- *App model*: A collection of resources that make up your distributed application ([DistributedApplication](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/aspire.hosting.distributedapplication)). For a more formal definition, see [Define the app model](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#define-the-app-model).
- *App host/Orchestrator project*: The .NET project that defines and orchestrates the *app model*, named with the **.AppHost* suffix (by convention).
- *Resource*: A [resource](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#built-in-resource-types) represents a part of an application whether it be a .NET project, container, or executable, or some other resource like a database, cache, or cloud service (such as a storage service).
- *Reference*: A reference defines a connection between resources, expressed as a dependency using the `WithReference` API. For more information, see [Reference resources](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#reference-resources).

## Create App Host Project

> [!NOTE]
> **Experimental Feature with .NET 10**
>
> There is a new feature with Aspire 9.5 that allows you to use a single-file AppHost to define and launch your application system.  We'll describe how to use that technique at the end of this module.

### Visual Studio & Visual Studio Code

1. Add a new project to the solution called `AppHost`:
   - Right-click on the solution and select `Add` > `New Project`.
   - Select the `.NET Aspire App Host` project template.
   - Name the project `AppHost`.
   - Click `Next` > `Create`.

    *Visual Studio*
    ![Visual Studio dialog to add a app host project](../media/vs-add-apphost.png)

    *Visual Studio Code*
    ![Visual Studio Code dialog to add a app host project](../media/vsc-add-apphost.png)

### Command Line

1. Create a new project using the `dotnet new aspire-apphost` command:

    ```bash
    dotnet new aspire-apphost -n AppHost
    ```

2. Add the new AppHost project to your solution (required for CLI users):

    ```bash
    dotnet sln add AppHost/AppHost.csproj
    ```

## Add Project References

1. Add a reference to the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects in the new `AppHost` project:
   - Right-click on the `AppHost` project and select `Add` > `Reference`.
   - Check the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects and click `OK`.

     > Pro Tip: In Visual Studio 2022, you can drag and drop the project onto another project to add a reference.

1. When these references are added, helper classes are automatically generated to help add them to the app model in the App Host.

## Orchestrate the Application

1. In the `AppHost` project, update the `Program.cs` file, adding the following line immediately after the `var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);` line:

    ```csharp
    var api = builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api");

    var web = builder.AddProject<Projects.MyWeatherHub>("myweatherhub");
    ```

## Run the application

1. Set the `AppHost` project as the startup project in Visual Studio by right-clicking the `AppHost` project and selecting `Set as Startup Project`.
1. If you are using Visual Studio Code open the `launch.json` and replace all of the contents with the following:

    ```json
    {
        "version": "0.2.0",
        "configurations": [
            {
                "name": "Run AppHost",
                "type": "dotnet",
                "request": "launch",
                "projectPath": "${workspaceFolder}\\AppHost\\AppHost.csproj"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```

1. Run the App Host using the `Run and Debug` panel in Visual Studio Code or Visual Studio.
1. The .NET Aspire Dashboard will open in your default browser and display the resources and dependencies of your application.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard.png)

1. Open the weather page by clicking the Endpoint for the `MyWeatherHub` project resource which will be [https://localhost:7274](https://localhost:7274).
1. Notice that both the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects are running and can communicate with each other the same way as before using configuration settings.
1. Back on the Aspire Dashboard, click on the `View Logs` button to see the console logs from the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects.
1. Select the `Traces` tab and select `View` on a trace where the API is being called.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-trace.png)

1. Explore the `Metrics` tab to see the metrics for the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-metrics.png)

## Create an error

1. Open the `Structured` tab on the dashboard.
1. Set the `Level` to `Error` and notice that no errors appear
1. On the `MyWeatherApp` website, click on several different cities to generate errors. Usually, clicking on 5 different cities will generate at least one error.
1. After generating the errors, the `Structured` tab will automatically update on the dashboard and display the errors.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-error.png)

1. Click on the `Trace` or the `Details` to see the error message and stack trace.

> Note: The API intentionally simulates an error roughly every 5th forecast request in `NwsManager` to make it easy to observe failures in the dashboard during development.
> Note: Health endpoints like `/health` and `/alive` are mapped by `MapDefaultEndpoints()` only when the app runs in the Development environment. Ensure you're running locally in Development when following health-check steps.

## The Dashboard Resource Graph

We saw the table of resources in the .NET Aspire dashboard and that's a nice list of our resources, and we'll see that grow as our application system starts to utilize more resources.  Additionally, there is a **Graph** view of resources available by clicking the **Graph** text just above the table.

![.NET Aspire Dashboard Resource Graph](../media/dashboard-graph.png)

This graph is generated based on the references and relationships you configure for your application.

## New Dashboard Features in .NET Aspire 9.4

### Automatic Update Notifications

The dashboard now automatically checks for newer versions of .NET Aspire and shows friendly notifications when updates are available. This helps you stay current with the latest improvements and security updates.

### Enhanced Parameter and Connection String Visibility

Parameters and connection strings are now visible in the dashboard, providing better visibility into your application's configuration during development:

- Connection strings appear in resource details with secure toggle visibility
- Parameters show their current state and values
- This makes debugging configuration issues much easier during development

### Console Log Text Wrapping Control

The dashboard includes a new toggle for controlling text wrapping in console logs, making it easier to view long log lines. You can find the toggle in the console logs view to switch between wrapped and unwrapped text display.

### Hidden Resource Visibility Toggle

You can now show/hide hidden resources in the dashboard to see internal infrastructure components when needed. This gives you complete visibility into your application's infrastructure components that are normally hidden from view.

### Enhanced Peer Visualization

The dashboard can now visualize connections between resources even when they aren't instrumented with telemetry. This includes:

- Connection string parsing for various database types
- Parameter visualization for URLs and connection strings
- External service mapping between your services and external dependencies

## Experimental Single-File AppHost with .NET 10

> [!CAUTION]
>
> This section contains experimental features released as part of Aspire 9.5 and .NET 10.  This feature may change in future releases

Starting with .NET 10 and Aspire 9.5, you can use the Aspire command-line to create a single-file AppHost.cs file that you can use to orchestrate your application instead of another .NET class library project.  For more information about the single-file capabilities of .NET 10, check out Damian Edwards [blog post introducing the feature](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/announcing-dotnet-run-app/). 

At the command-line in the same folder as your solution file (MyWeatherHub.sln) you can run this command:

```bash
aspire new -n Weather -o . aspire-apphost-singlefile -v 9.5.0
```

This will create an `apphost.cs` along with several supporting configuration files.  This C# file contains some new features introduced in .NET 10:

```csharp
#:sdk Aspire.AppHost.Sdk@9.5.0

var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Build().Run();
```

The `#:sdk` line directs the .NET runtime to use the Aspire SDK to manage this application.  We can add references to the projects in this solution with the `#:project ` directive and finish our AppHost with this content:

```csharp
#:sdk Aspire.AppHost.Sdk@9.5.0
#:project Api
#:project MyWeatherHub

var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var api = builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api");
var web = builder.AddProject<Projects.MyWeatherHub>("myweatherhub");

builder.Build().Run();
```

This has the same effect as the project structure and AppHost.cs file in that project.  It just makes it very concise and easily readable.  To run the Aspire system, we now need to use the command-line:

```bash
aspire run
```

You're welcome to continue using this experimental structure instead, and we'll touch on some of the differences in the modules ahead.

If you want to convert your `apphost.cs` file to a full-project you can use the .NET 10 command-line:

```bash
dotnet project convert apphost.cs
```

**Next**: [Module #4: Service Discovery](../Lesson-04-ServiceDiscovery/README.md)

Commit message:

Added config information about Aspire single-file apphost

workshop/Lesson-03-Dashboard-AppHost/README.md, after:

# Dashboard & Orchestration with .NET Aspire App Host

.NET Aspire provides APIs for modeling resources and dependencies within your distributed application. In addition to these APIs, there's tooling that enables some compelling scenarios. The orchestrator is intended for local development purposes.

Before continuing, consider some common terminology used in .NET Aspire:

- *App model*: A collection of resources that make up your distributed application ([DistributedApplication](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/aspire.hosting.distributedapplication)). For a more formal definition, see [Define the app model](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#define-the-app-model).
- *App host/Orchestrator project*: The .NET project that defines and orchestrates the *app model*, named with the **.AppHost* suffix (by convention).
- *Resource*: A [resource](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#built-in-resource-types) represents a part of an application whether it be a .NET project, container, or executable, or some other resource like a database, cache, or cloud service (such as a storage service).
- *Reference*: A reference defines a connection between resources, expressed as a dependency using the `WithReference` API. For more information, see [Reference resources](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/app-host-overview?tabs=docker#reference-resources).

## Create App Host Project

> [!NOTE]
> **Experimental Feature with .NET 10**
>
> There is a new feature with Aspire 9.5 that allows you to use a single-file AppHost to define and launch your application system.  We'll describe how to use that technique at the end of this module.

### Visual Studio & Visual Studio Code

1. Add a new project to the solution called `AppHost`:
   - Right-click on the solution and select `Add` > `New Project`.
   - Select the `.NET Aspire App Host` project template.
   - Name the project `AppHost`.
   - Click `Next` > `Create`.

    *Visual Studio*
    ![Visual Studio dialog to add a app host project](../media/vs-add-apphost.png)

    *Visual Studio Code*
    ![Visual Studio Code dialog to add a app host project](../media/vsc-add-apphost.png)

### Command Line

1. Create a new project using the `dotnet new aspire-apphost` command:

    ```bash
    dotnet new aspire-apphost -n AppHost
    ```

2. Add the new AppHost project to your solution (required for CLI users):

    ```bash
    dotnet sln add AppHost/AppHost.csproj
    ```

## Add Project References

1. Add a reference to the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects in the new `AppHost` project:
   - Right-click on the `AppHost` project and select `Add` > `Reference`.
   - Check the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects and click `OK`.

     > Pro Tip: In Visual Studio 2022, you can drag and drop the project onto another project to add a reference.

1. When these references are added, helper classes are automatically generated to help add them to the app model in the App Host.

## Orchestrate the Application

1. In the `AppHost` project, update the `Program.cs` file, adding the following line immediately after the `var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);` line:

    ```csharp
    var api = builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api");

    var web = builder.AddProject<Projects.MyWeatherHub>("myweatherhub");
    ```

## Run the application

1. Set the `AppHost` project as the startup project in Visual Studio by right-clicking the `AppHost` project and selecting `Set as Startup Project`.
1. If you are using Visual Studio Code open the `launch.json` and replace all of the contents with the following:

    ```json
    {
        "version": "0.2.0",
        "configurations": [
            {
                "name": "Run AppHost",
                "type": "dotnet",
                "request": "launch",
                "projectPath": "${workspaceFolder}\\AppHost\\AppHost.csproj"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```

1. Run the App Host using the `Run and Debug` panel in Visual Studio Code or Visual Studio.
1. The .NET Aspire Dashboard will open in your default browser and display the resources and dependencies of your application.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard.png)

1. Open the weather page by clicking the Endpoint for the `MyWeatherHub` project resource which will be [https://localhost:7274](https://localhost:7274).
1. Notice that both the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects are running and can communicate with each other the same way as before using configuration settings.
1. Back on the Aspire Dashboard, click on the `View Logs` button to see the console logs from the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects.
1. Select the `Traces` tab and select `View` on a trace where the API is being called.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-trace.png)

1. Explore the `Metrics` tab to see the metrics for the `Api` and `MyWeatherHub` projects.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-metrics.png)

## Create an error

1. Open the `Structured` tab on the dashboard.
1. Set the `Level` to `Error` and notice that no errors appear
1. On the `MyWeatherApp` website, click on several different cities to generate errors. Usually, clicking on 5 different cities will generate at least one error.
1. After generating the errors, the `Structured` tab will automatically update on the dashboard and display the errors.

    ![.NET Aspire Dashboard](../media/dashboard-error.png)

1. Click on the `Trace` or the `Details` to see the error message and stack trace.

> Note: The API intentionally simulates an error roughly every 5th forecast request in `NwsManager` to make it easy to observe failures in the dashboard during development.
> Note: Health endpoints like `/health` and `/alive` are mapped by `MapDefaultEndpoints()` only when the app runs in the Development environment. Ensure you're running locally in Development when following health-check steps.

## The Dashboard Resource Graph

We saw the table of resources in the .NET Aspire dashboard and that's a nice list of our resources, and we'll see that grow as our application system starts to utilize more resources.  Additionally, there is a **Graph** view of resources available by clicking the **Graph** text just above the table.

![.NET Aspire Dashboard Resource Graph](../media/dashboard-graph.png)

This graph is generated based on the references and relationships you configure for your application.

## New Dashboard Features in .NET Aspire 9.4

### Automatic Update Notifications

The dashboard now automatically checks for newer versions of .NET Aspire and shows friendly notifications when updates are available. This helps you stay current with the latest improvements and security updates.

### Enhanced Parameter and Connection String Visibility

Parameters and connection strings are now visible in the dashboard, providing better visibility into your application's configuration during development:

- Connection strings appear in resource details with secure toggle visibility
- Parameters show their current state and values
- This makes debugging configuration issues much easier during development

### Console Log Text Wrapping Control

The dashboard includes a new toggle for controlling text wrapping in console logs, making it easier to view long log lines. You can find the toggle in the console logs view to switch between wrapped and unwrapped text display.

### Hidden Resource Visibility Toggle

You can now show/hide hidden resources in the dashboard to see internal infrastructure components when needed. This gives you complete visibility into your application's infrastructure components that are normally hidden from view.

### Enhanced Peer Visualization

The dashboard can now visualize connections between resources even when they aren't instrumented with telemetry. This includes:

- Connection string parsing for various database types
- Parameter visualization for URLs and connection strings
- External service mapping between your services and external dependencies

## Experimental Single-File AppHost with .NET 10

> [!CAUTION]
>
> This section contains experimental features released as part of Aspire 9.5 and .NET 10.  This feature may change in future releases.  It will only work if you have the .NET 10 SDK or later installed.

Starting with .NET 10 and Aspire 9.5, you can use the Aspire command-line to create a single-file AppHost.cs file that you can use to orchestrate your application instead of another .NET class library project.  For more information about the single-file capabilities of .NET 10, check out Damian Edwards [blog post introducing the feature](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/announcing-dotnet-run-app/). 

Before we can start using the new Single-File AppHost feature, we need to activate it with a feature flag in the Aspire command-line tool.  We also need to disable the minimum SDK check, because the current version of Aspire rejects the .NET 10 prerelease SDK version.

```bash
aspire config set features.singlefileAppHostEnabled true
aspire config set features.minimumSdkCheckEnabled false
```


At the command-line in the same folder as your solution file (MyWeatherHub.sln) you can run this command:

```bash
aspire new -n Weather -o . aspire-apphost-singlefile -v 9.5.0
```

This will create an `apphost.cs` along with several supporting configuration files.  This C# file contains some new features introduced in .NET 10:

```csharp
#:sdk Aspire.AppHost.Sdk@9.5.0

var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Build().Run();
```

The `#:sdk` line directs the .NET runtime to use the Aspire SDK to manage this application.  We can add references to the projects in this solution with the `#:project ` directive and finish our AppHost with this content:

```csharp
#:sdk Aspire.AppHost.Sdk@9.5.0
#:project Api
#:project MyWeatherHub

var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var api = builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api");
var web = builder.AddProject<Projects.MyWeatherHub>("myweatherhub");

builder.Build().Run();
```

This has the same effect as the project structure and AppHost.cs file in that project.  It just makes it very concise and easily readable.  To run the Aspire system, we now need to use the command-line:

```bash
aspire run
```

You're welcome to continue using this experimental structure instead, and we'll touch on some of the differences in the modules ahead.

If you want to convert your `apphost.cs` file to a full-project you can use the .NET 10 command-line:

```bash
dotnet project convert apphost.cs
```

**Next**: [Module #4: Service Discovery](../Lesson-04-ServiceDiscovery/README.md)
